Good morning.
Morning, Minister.
We've set aside 15 minutes to
talk about the Agricultural Compounds and Veterinary Medicines
Amendment Bill,
so
hook into it.
Okay. Probably don't need to talk about the problem statement.
I think we all got that from the first reading
and all the evidence you've heard up to now.
In terms of the bill itself, I think what I might just
cover off quickly is
what we're trying to solve is to increase that speed,
make sure these products are getting to market
in a clear
and an improved timeline. We don't want to be spending
years and years. As you heard from some of the submitters on the HASNO,
New Zealand's a very small market in the world.
If it seems like it's too hard a job to do here in New Zealand,
those companies don't come here. Our farmers, growers, don't get
the opportunity to use the latest technology, the newest
drugs, chemicals, whatever. And so it's
important that we're a
market that people want to be involved with, and so
we do need to look at how we can make the process a hell of a lot more
efficient. I think the key thing with the bill is relying on
some of those trusted overseas jurisdictions.
We do have an MOU with Australia, so there's elements
in this bill that's going to make it a lot more
user-friendly in terms of
ensuring that we take advantage
of the work that's already been done in Australia,
to actually get approvals much
faster here in New Zealand.
I think you may have guessed from my question
in the previous thing around the-- and I assume this is going to be a very similar
question that you're going to have placed in front of you in terms
of these timelines. Are they best in primary
legislation? Are they best in regulation?
I've got a feeling that my personal belief and
where we've landed at has been that if we've got them in
regulation, we can target particularly those
new, novel,
ingredients, the stuff that our farmers and
growers need, so we can set precise
timelines for that to be delivered.
At the moment,
we do have it in
primary legislation, and we're not really achieving it anywhere near fast
enough, and it's often we're able to do the simple
stuff really quickly,
but it's that harder stuff that we need to be a bit more focused on.
So my feeling is,
certainly I'd be more
inclined to make sure we stick with where it is
in regulation.
And there's some other matters in there
where the use of
overseas information and stuff, there's-- I
can't remember the wording off by hand, but it's sort of at the
direction of the director general.
And so there's questions there, I think, and the industry's rightly pointing out
that
they are concerned with
that certainty that things will be done.
And so, I would really encourage the committee
to have a good look at
how can we not only speed up this process,
ensure that all the safeguards are in place, but at the same
time, where we position these things, be it primary regulation
or discretion.
There's that trade-off between flexibility and certainty for industry, and
so certainly be interested in any feedback
when you're through this
process, any feedback the select committee has on whether you think
changes could or should be made, to
enable, trying to
find that
ideal balance point between flexibility and
certainty.
Would it be fair to say that we're losing capability
and scientists
offshore because
there's a reticence to invest in R&D
by some of the
companies that once did invest here in New Zealand?
Yeah. You've seen this. And I can't say whether it's
solely attributable to the time
lag that it's taking to get stuff approved by through HASNO and
ACVM,
but it is happening. And so we've got to make sure that
we provide a regulatory environment that encourages
companies to come here to think of- New Zealand
as the innovative agricultural place where they want to be
investing in,
and that they do this research and stuff here in this
country.
We've certainly got the innovative farmers
that'll be taking advantage of it, so I think that's an important thing.
Steve, you had a question. No?
Any other questions? No.
Don't want to know whether Halter's impacted by
Well, go on, tell us.
No.
No. It was funny. That came up-
Sorry. Inside joke. Yeah.
Ah.
Very good. All right. Thanks very much.
No worries.
And-
Like I say, I'm quite interested and, as you go through this process,
any sort of feedback you've got,
I'm more than interested. If you think there's value changes that could be
made to help, not only strengthen the system, speed it up, and give
certainty industry, more than interested in hearing them.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you. I think the only, the biggest fear of
that is with 10 million dollars.
Yeah. Well, that hopefully the vets will talk about.
Right.
So,
going to move on to the hearing of evidence.
First up is the New Zealand Vegetable Council,
and James and Jay are back.
Yeah. Thank you. Sorry, James had to go back to the farm.
Oh.
So it's just me. But-
Somebody's got to.
There's Jay. Someone's got to work
... So just James.
Yeah.
Yeah. So, I think Jay did a fantastic job this morning to really articulate the
concerns from the vegetable growers' perspectives.
Yeah.
And so this, I guess, he also dovetailed into the ACVM side a bit, so
we'll try and just articulate that position now.
So,
chair, thank you very much for your time today.
My name is James Koufos from the New Zealand Vegetable Council.
We represent New Zealand's vegetable growers, processors, and
exporters across New Zealand, which right now are going through a fairly difficult
time, but we're always encouraged by looking forward.
ACVM, like the HSNO Act, are critically
important for the vegetable sector.
So the key difference, I guess, from the vegetable side of things, compared to
perhaps our larger
colleagues around the primary sector, is just the size of the crops that we're
growing and the label extension. So, we have the
0.1 default MRL in New Zealand, which is superb.
I don't think we could operate without that.
And so we need to make sure we maintain that position around the maximum
residue limits. What we're kind of seeking, I guess, is the ease to be able
to
register products for these crops, for these niche crops.
Because, the default MRL of 0.1 is a great fallback
position, but if the product is actually registered at a different rate, a
different residue limit,
we might be scoring an own goal here in New Zealand where we say, "Actually,
now you've got to have a withholding period of 30 days or 40 days." And so for
some of these crops, like spinach,
that's just not feasible with how quick the crop grows.
No.
So that's where we're getting stuck is saying, "Right, the default is superb,
and we don't want to touch that or look at removing that." But the
headache we've got is getting those label registrations for these
niche crops, and particularly whether, niche like celery or
spinach, et cetera, where there's just no financial incentive for multinationals
to come to New Zealand right now. So, very, very complicated and
tough for our sector, but fundamental as well.
We touched on resistance management earlier on.
So,
without having the ability to rotate these different products
and, yeah, there's a lot of discussion around biopesticides, but also other
novel products coming through that we need to make sure
we have a pathway for future products we don't have a label for yet, or
we don't know about yet. So we're talking mostly about synthetic
chemistry, and we talk about biopesticides, but there are other novel
controls that we need to also keep in mind, keep
open to in the future as well. So just making sure we capture that for
the legislation.
And I guess the other one that we want to highlight is around biosecurity
incursions. So when we do have incursions, yeah, there's rapid
pathways and the likes,
but we think it's more attractive to try and maintain these products for New
Zealand, so we've got them ready to go rather than trying to register them,
and get approval later on. Because that pathway can take
six-plus months and by that stage, whatever we're trying to control is
out of control, out of our hands. So we just need to be mindful
as well about how do we manage
those kind of incursions and make sure we're prepared as best as we can.
Probably the final point
that we want to make is around the legislation is probably a third of
the solution.
The other two thirds are around resourcing and staffing for the
departments, for EPA and MPI, and also making sure that they've
got the right culture, to actually implement the
legislation. We had the HSNO Amendment Act four years ago.
We're going back over through the HSNO Act now, but the culture,
which we're seeing really positive changes right now to actually say we need to be
more permissible, find ways to work through these solutions as well.
We think that's equally as important as the legislation, and we're really
encouraged by both EPA and MPI in
terms of the changes in staff culture to actually say, "We've got to find
solutions here." So, MPI colleagues in particular are looking at the
Codex standards, so falling back to those instead of
having to go to defaults, as well. That's a really sensible approach that
the officials are taking, and so it's something that may not be captured in the
legislation, but we should acknowledge the good work that officials actually are
taking to get there. The resourcing, the backlog
pipeline,
the legislation may help us, but we're still going to have a big backlog to
actually clear. And so we're also supportive of trying to address that
backlog however possible, if it's temporary resourcing,
just so we get rid of that five-year plus backlog and we get back
to where we should be and move forward. Yeah.
So those are the main points that we wish to Just to reiterate, we
think New Zealand's a fantastic place to be growing vegetables.
We want to continue,
and this legislation will help us a lot.
Thank you.
Could you give us an example of something that is covered
by the ACVM Act and not the HSNO Act that you'd
be,
as Vegetable Oil New Zealand-
Yep
... interested in
having a pathway speed up for?
Yeah, sure. So,
it's probably the label extension.
So the one we touched on earlier on, Movento,
in Australia and is registered in New Zealand.
So it can be used in New Zealand already for those crops it's
registered for, and it can be used off-label.
The headache we have is we want to promote the use of some of these products,
but currently we can't do that. So it actually is a really
good IPM product to be able to say it
doesn't harm the beneficial insects in the field and is targeted towards the
thrips.
We can't promote that as industry bodies right now to say, "You should be
using this product because it's softer," because it's not registered on the field
crops that we represent. So that would be an example where we're a little bit
stuck. We kind of-
Mm
... hope that our members come to the appropriate position.
Yeah.
Steve.
Steve, so sup on that. So
for comprehension of the layperson,
you're allowed to use this stuff.
Yep.
It's in New Zealand right now being used. You're not allowed to promote it.
Yeah, correct. So even if it's a softer product-
Yeah
... we can't be promoting something that's not registered for our crops, I guess.
Yeah.
Yeah. And so
why aren't you allowed to promote it?
It's probably one for the officials, but yeah,
we just try to follow the rules, I guess, on it but-
Because there's a regulatory barrier to you promoting.
Yeah.
So, yeah. Because it hasn't been through the New Zealand system for
human health implications. Yeah.
But how has it not been through the system if you're using it?
Because we're consuming it right now, if there's any-
Yeah
... residues or whatever.
Yeah, so it's registered for potatoes, but not for spinach or
something.
Right.
Yeah. So we can promote it for potato use, but we can't promote it for spinach
use, for example. Yep.
Why is that?
Yep. Ugh.
My understanding is just in the regulations then. But yeah.
Is it because there's different residues or different...
Because you're using it on the foliage of the potato, not on the-
Yeah. But it comes back to the default MRL still, back to the
0.1. So yeah, the- ... human
risk doesn't change. Yeah.
But is it because on the actual bit of the potato that you eat, it hasn't been
applied because that's in the-
It's systemic, is it?
It's not really, like,
it doesn't
go into the use practices or-
Right
... anything. It's just, yeah, we default back to the residue limit.
Yep.
Mm.
Right. And so there would be more residue if you used it on spinach because it's
going straight on the foliage that you eat.
It's not that there's more residue or anything.
It's still just that there's no registration for it, so we default back to that
0.1. Yep. So it's not about the use or crop or, yeah.
Mm.
Okay. Thank you.
Is this what Jay was talking about before with the broccoli and not being able to
use it on the spinach? The drug for the... I can't remember.
Was it something rust or something that-
Yeah. Yeah. That's right.
Yeah.
But we've also got to be careful with holding periods.
So it's not the actual effects that you're measuring, it's just that one's
registered so you can do the actual effects and the other one's not
registered, so you have to log it at the highest possible.
Yeah.
So it's-
So it's not actually, for the one that's not registered, you're not actually
It seems like a-
Yeah
... silly thing.
Jay's one was that you might have it registered, and it might be at
five instead of 0.1, so you've got a
greater tolerance for the product.
So you can use it right up until like five days before harvest or something because
it's a more benign product or something.
Oh, okay.
So his point was, if you're at five parts per million,
for the broccoli,
you can use it till five days in advance.
Whereas if you're off-label and you've got it dropped down to 0.1 now, then
you'd need to cut off at like 30 days in advance just because there's
no label or guidance on it. Yep.
Yeah.
Yep.
But it doesn't actually reflect the safety of the product necessarily.
No, because it's registered already-
Yeah
... in like Australia or something.
Yeah.
So yeah, we just-
Mm
... get a little bit stuck here.
So it's to do with off-label use.
Yeah. So-
For them, yeah.
Yeah.
And on.
And the limits.
Mm.
Yeah, because the default is back to that 0.1.
So if there's a higher threshold for different products, for different crops,
you can go to that threshold.
Would there be-
So it's like a default if it's not registered.
Yeah, I understand.
Yeah.
Would there be-
So it's not actually reflecting the effects.
Yeah. Would there be export
considerations around that-
Um
... do you think?
Yeah. So there are export headaches as well.
So if we export to Europe or UK and to retailers,
they ask us for, "What's your list of registered products in New Zealand?"
Yes.
And we kind of had to say, "Oh, geez, here's the list.
But we're allowed to use these other ones as well, but you know." And that's a
complicated conversation to have.
Yeah.
I can believe it.
To kind of say, "Oh, these are the ones." And they kind of say, "Oh, you're using
these ones as well." And it's like, "Yeah, like there's a New Zealand pathway
here." So, that's a headache. We would prefer to be
using registered products-
Yeah
... clearly. But,
we also don't want to get rid of that off-label pathway, because that would
really, really damage the efficacy. Yeah.
Steve-
Just for clarity though, the on-label
rules are designed around the-
Principles of what safe ways to use those chemicals, right?
Yeah.
So you're not meant to be using stuff off-label, and once you start using stuff
off-label, you're going outside the parameters that stuff's
been approved as the safe use of that
product.
I've been not really-
No.
Hence using-
It's more like stringent limit that says, "Okay, it's not registered
at five."
Yeah.
You can use the more stringent limit of 0.1 if it's not registered.
Maybe talk about-
Kind of safeguard. Yeah
... is there a reason it's not registered?
It's just, it's still cost to register.
Yeah. So that's the reason.
Cost, yeah.
And so they're cheaper. I think that's what Jay alluded to, too.
Yeah.
That the product, it's not the cost of registration precludes it
being worth it, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Okay. Any further questions?
No.
Thanks very much, James.
It's okay.
It's complex stuff.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's really detailed, complex, and yeah, we really appreciate the effort to
actually dive into it because it's not easy.
But we've got to find a way through for New Zealand here.
Yeah. What percentage of our fresh vegetables do we export, of the weight, like
what you grow, to your significant-
Prior to two months ago,
would've been more. Now we're probably at 80% domestic for fresh-
I would've even thought that would be higher.
Well, we export onions-
Oh, okay
... about $150 million worth of onions.
We export processed vegetables and frozen fries
to Australia.
Yeah.
Yeah. So-
But fresh is just onions, basically?
Capsicums as well to some markets, and we fly
some stuff into Hong Kong, Singapore, Pacific Islands.
We do a lot of trade because-
Mm
... they can't grow vegetables easily there, so we do a lot of Pacific Island trade
for veggies, yeah. Mm.
Cool. Thank you very much.
Thanks, all.
Thanks, James.
Thank you, mate.
Thank you.
We'll move on to Seed and Grain New Zealand.
Mm.
And we've got Sarah and Cressida back
online.
Hello. Hi.
How are you?
Thanks for having us again. Yes, so I'm Sarah Clark,
the Chief Executive of Seed and Grain New Zealand, and I'm joined
by Cressida Patrick, our Biosecurity and
Technical Manager. So we represent seed
and grain companies and also ag chem companies who are
supplying chemicals to the seed and grain industry.
Cressida and I are going to do a tag-team submission again.
I'm conscious that you've heard our context earlier this
morning-
Mm-hmm
... when we addressed the HASNO bill.
But for the record on ACVM submission, I am going to
repeat much of our context to set the scene.
A key point is that our industry relies on
chemicals to produce seeds and grains important to New Zealand's
economy. Crop failures are our future if we
can't access appropriate chemicals.
So our members are producing grains, including wheat, barley, and
oats, and these are used for human consumption and also
our animal feed. And our members are producing the seeds for
sowing for the domestic,
excuse me,
and the international markets.
It includes grass seed, clover seed, forage,
oil seeds, and vegetable seeds. Our industry does have
a reputation in the global seed trade for
providing very high-quality seeds,
and we want to keep it that way, because we're
producing 40 to 50% of the world's carrot seed and
60% of the world's radish and clover seed.
Why are chemicals important to our industry?
Well, the seeds for sowing are treated with a light coating
of agrichemical before they're sown, and it really does
make a big difference to the health
of the crop. It gives the crop a really healthy start because it's
protecting the seed and the young shoots and roots in the
soil from pests and diseases. And then, of course, we're using
chemicals during the growth of the crop,
for controlling weeds and pests and diseases, all the way through to
seed set.
So yeah, without access to the right chemicals at the right
time, farmers and seed companies can't produce that
high-quality, high-purity seed and grain that is
demanded. There's a world global demand for our seed because
of our reputation for doing such a good job.
And hence, because chemicals are so important, the proposed changes
to the ACVM Act are something that we want to comment
on. There are some aspects that we think can be further
improved.
I spoke earlier
in the HASNO bill hearing about the impact of
the regulatory settings on our industry,
and those comments are equally relatable to the
ACVM Bill, so I will emphasize them again.
The regulations have a direct impact on the sustainability and
productiveness of arable farms and seed companies.
And
a key reason why that matters is the codependency between the arable
sector and the other primary sectors.
So any positive or negative impact on arable
farms does flow through all the way to our
dairy farms and sheep farms, whose export
products are underpinning wealth generation in New Zealand.
And secondly, the regulations will
impact our ability to supply seeds back to the
international market.
And the key issue there is that the EU in particular is
prohibiting agrochemicals faster than we can approve
chemicals that they do allow. So,
we will be unable to use new or novel chemistries unless our
approval process is quick pace. I am going to
hand across to Chris. She's got three points, technical
points that she would like to address. Thank you.
Sarah. So as with the Hasno Amendment Bill, we're supporting
modernizing the ACVM framework. We believe
this will provide a more proportionate risk-based regulatory system,
and we support increasing alignment with the trusted international regulators.
These are reforms that our sector's been advocating for for many years.
The submission has three key points.
The first one is that we support the proposal to allow the Director-General to
exempt lower-risk agricultural compounds from registration
requirements.
We consider exemptions are an important part of modern risk-based
regulatory frameworks and lower-risk products, such as
biostimulants, which are often cited as
a crop,
a probiotic rather than a chemistry,
is considered a lower-risk compound and shouldn't face the
same regulatory burden as a higher-risk compound.
We think moving these exemptions from Cabinet to the Director-General will make the
process more efficient and responsive, and
we consider this as a very positive move.
However, we would like to urge that transparent criteria is
used, and that clear evidence requirements and clear
explanations when an application is declined,
is provided by the Director-General to the
appropriate people. We believe this will help ensure the
consistency, fairness, transparency, and
confidence in the decision-making process that
you will have heard a lot of the applicants are reliant on.
Secondly, we believe the bill should go further in recognizing assessments
undertaken by the trusted overseas regulators.
We would like to acknowledge the work that the New Zealand Food Safety has done in
the Trans-Tasman pilot for manufacturers and agrochemicals
to support registration in both countries, and we would support more
initiatives like this.
Where a product has already undergone a rigorous scientific assessment by a
recognized regulator such as Australia, Canada, EU,
US,
these assessments should form the primary basis for the decision-making in
New Zealand, unless there's a clearly identified New Zealand-specific
consideration.
As currently drafted, we consider that the bill gives significant
discretion to the Director-General, but doesn't necessarily provide that
feedback loop to the applicant
that provides the certainty that they need.
The overseas assessments may be considered, but there's no
clear expectation that they will be relied
upon. We recommend stronger requirements for transparency,
including clear criteria for recognition
decision-making, and again, we'd like to emphasize that
explanation should be provided back to the applicant where an overseas
assessment is not relied upon.
Thirdly,
we consider that there is the missed opportunity to
focus on that, establishing the dedicated pathway for
biopesticides and as James alluded to, as well
as other newer novel chemistry,
newer techniques that we may not necessarily be aware of.
The New Zealand framework treats many biopesticides in a
similar manner to conventional synthetic pesticides, despite
their generally lower risk profiles.
We believe that this creates higher compliance cost, regulatory
uncertainty, and obviously the lengthy approval time frames.
As alluded to in our earlier presentation, the biopesticides and
other newer techniques are becoming increasingly important
offshore as the older synthetic chemistries are
being phased out. We believe that ensuring a
framework that supports these newer technologies
can help manage resistance, reduce reliance on the older
chemistry, and support access to the domestic markets that we need to
continue accessing.
I'll just give two quick examples.
So domestically, we've had the loss of chlorpyrifos, and we've got the
upcoming loss of diazinon, two of the
main controls for grass grub, a hugely important New Zealand
endemic pest species that's not present anywhere else,
that has a huge impact on the arable sector.
We are going to become increasingly reliant on these
biopesticides such as BioShield and Verterblast to help
control New Zealand grass grubs.
Unfortunately, these biopesticides take a number of years to
actually establish
and grow
in the actual fields themselves and also limit the
synthetic chemistries that can be used when they have been applied.
So there's some considerations that our farmers will need to
actually consider
in an upcoming on-the-ground example that's going to
happen.
Globally, the EU again is one of our main markets, and as
they phase out the synthetic chemistry, we will not
be able to supply treated seed that has the older chemistries that
are available to us.
Other jurisdictions such as Australia, Canada, US, and EU have
developed more tailored and proportionate pathways for
biopesticides and some of those other lower-risk compounds,
and we recommend the bill considers including an enabling provision that
allows these dedicated pathways in New Zealand.
In closing, Seed and Grain support the overall direction of the
ACVM Amendment Bill, and we welcome your commitment to working on
the framework.
We consider this as a long overdue opportunity, and
we are excited to see genuine reform,
but we do consider further work is needed.
We encourage the committee to strengthen the bill by providing greater
certainty to the applicants around the
recognition of trusted international assessment, and also we
really encourage that transparency
for applicants to ensure those business cases remain
justified and eligible within New Zealand.
New Zealand growers and seed companies need a regulatory system that
can keep pace with innovation without jeopardising New
Zealand's human health or the environment.
By getting these settings right, we believe we will support a more productive,
sustainable, and internationally competitive future for our sector
and for the wider agricultural economy.
Thanks again for your opportunity to
speak to our submission, and we'd welcome any questions.
Thank you. We've got Steve.
Yeah, I've got a few questions.
Go for it.
Which agrochemical companies do you represent?
So we have several members. I actually am not
entirely sure if I can say that.
My apologies. That's not something I've had to consider.
We have-
You can tell us
... yeah, we've got-
It's in the public domain. It is on our webpage, so yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
I fear I might miss some off if I start-
... saying. So,
BASF, Bayer-
Syngenta
... Syngenta. There are others, and I apologize
if I can't remember.
That's all good. That's good.
Apologize to those. Yeah.
I mean, those are the big, bad ones, so that's good to know.
The,
yeah. I would-
The, so I got another question on that. I mean, that's useful to understand.
Are you still using paraquat with your clover production?
Hmm. That is a question I don't have an answer
to. We can find out, though, and get that back to you.
And-
Do you think it's-
... is that a problem, is that gonna be a problem in the EU?
I mean, paraquat's one of the chemicals that's been banned in dozens of countries
now. Still legal to use here and still legal to use in Australia,
but is that an example of an old synthetic chemical
that's highly toxic that we're gonna have to move away from, and you need some
other options?
Other options are always good. I mean, we
advocate for safer chemicals. What we're saying is we need
chemicals that protect the crops, and
we absolutely want safer chemicals.
In terms of the ability for us to export
seeds to the EU, the issue is more about the chemicals
that are used to coat the seed, and I don't think
paraquat is one of those.
No, it's not.
No.
I mean, I know paraquat is used in clover production, so it's useful-
It's a desiccant.
Yeah.
So you're not using it in New Zealand. Is that the message?
Not a seed treatment in Gordium.
And then,
in terms of,
I don't know, I'll leave it at there because other people have some questions, but
that's useful. Thank you.
Susan.
Look, we know that arable farmers have been doing it tough when everyone else seems
to be doing remarkably well at the moment, and I was just
wondering, are you able to say that with the changes to this legislation that
it will actually, and we've heard it from other submitters, increase
productivity, reduce costs, and also have the ability to
reduce the environmental impact
of-
With the combined changes to HSNO
and ACVM, with the aim of making
the approvals of chemicals more efficient,
yes.
We need more of, a wider variety of
chemicals,
and yeah, anything that is going to
do that and provide more choice for farmers
and reduce the compliance costs is
going to be a good outcome.
The longer an application process is for the chemical
companies, that's a cost to them, and then they have to pass that on to their
customers. So,
efficient systems are cheaper, and that flows through to end users.
Chris, did you want to add anything to that?
Doesn't seem that she does.
No, sorry.
I've got a follow-up.
Look, no-
Yeah, sure
... we're out of time, so.
Oh, shoot. Okay.
Thank you very much, Sarah and Chris, for-
Thank you. Thanks for your time
... taking the time and being patient with us this morning.
Cheers. Right. We're gonna move on to Dairy NZ.
Just
remind you, Steve, that the paraquat is in
HSNO, won't be under ACVM.
Hmm.
Yeah. That's right.
Yeah.
Welcome again.
Thank you.
And thank you again for giving me the opportunity to talk today.
As with others,
much of what
is in our submission for ACVM is very similar to the HSNO submission that we
put in.
But I'm Carol Boneo, Principal Advisor in the biosecurity space for
Dairy NZ, and I talk on behalf of Dairy NZ, the industry good
organization that represents 11,000 dairy
farmers.
So why does this matter to our farmers?
At the core, this bill matters because it determines
how quickly and how reliably farmers have access to the
job they need to do. Farmers are at the
forefront of a lot of New Zealand's biggest challenges, climate
change, emerging biosecurity risks, and rising
expectations around animal health and welfare.
And right now, you've heard that there
is a regulatory system that could slow down the access to
new and improved products,
whether that's emissions mitigation tools, animal health
treatments, or biosecurity risk management tools.
For farmers, delays in access don't just create frustration.
They can have a direct impact on farm resilience, animal welfare outcomes,
and our ability to respond to biosecurity risks quickly and
efficiently.
So we strongly support the intent of the bill to improve efficiency,
transparency, and certainty for the approvals process.
The main points that we had in our submission were really around
improving access through proportionate regulation
and the current regulatory pathways affect farmers
in two main ways. One, it limits the ability to
research and test new greenhouse gas mitigation
solutions, and that's a significant issue for the dairy industry,
and it also delays access for tools that are needed to manage
emerging pests and diseases. And that also is a
huge concern for us.
And we are investing a lot in biosecurity readiness
to ensure that we are as prepared as possible, and part of that
preparedness is really around the tools that we have
available to manage those risks.
We support the changes to
introduce a more proportionate approvals pathway with greater use of
exemptions for low-risk products and more flexible processes
for product changes and applications, which are a very
complex, complicated area.
These are practical improvements that should reduce
unnecessary barriers while maintaining
proportionate safeguards, and that's critical to our dairy farmers
in terms of public health and also in terms of market access,
which goes on to the next topic around recognizing
overseas regular assessments. We also strongly
support the proposal that requires the director general to take into
account decisions from overseas
regulators that are recognized.
In practical terms, this means we should avoid duplication
where products have already been robustly assessed, sometimes in
our key markets that we're sending product to,
streamlining New Zealand's approval processes and improving access to
products that have already been proven in comparable
agricultural systems.
For farmers and veterinarians, this is critical, and timely
access to efficient tools will strongly influence
biosecurity preparedness, animal welfare outcomes,
and the ability to respond to new and emerging biosecurity
risks,
which are many and varied
at this particular time.
This is a common-sense change that should improve efficiency without compromising
safety or our market access.
In terms of timely and transparent decision-making, we welcome the bill's intent
for reducing time frames and cost to applicants.
Currently, high costs, uncertainty, long delays create
real barriers, as you've already heard,
particularly for a small market like New Zealand.
This can discourage international suppliers, meaning farmers may
have access to fewer or less effective products
than their overseas counterparts, and you will have also already heard some of
those examples.
We also support improvements to the data assessor framework, which
should enhance consistency and quality of those assessments,
give greater use of external expertise, especially for new and
emerging areas,
and also support more timely decision-making.
However, we note that the bill has not yet established
a clear emergency use pathway, a
fast-track process or targeted
mechanisms that can show transparently how we can
actually recognize and manage niche or
urgent products. And that certainly is a critical area for us.
This means that urgent biosecurity or
animal welfare needs may still face delays.
We encourage the government to continue strengthening the wider
regulatory framework to address these gaps.
And we also would finally like to emphasize that we
are looking for ensuring sound regulatory
outcomes in practice.
We would emphasize that much of the real impact of this bill
will depend on how it's implemented.
The bill provides an important enabling framework,
but the devil is in the detail that sits in the regulations that
underpin it and how those regulations are operationalized.
Getting those settings right will be critical in delivering faster access to
low-risk products, as you've also heard, proportionate
decision-making, and continued trust from our international trading
partners, and that's a critical issue for the dairy industry.
Dairy NZ welcomes the opportunity to engage further as those
regulations are developed.
So in closing, the bill is a step in the right direction.
It recognizes that farmers need timely access to
tools that meet the challenges ahead, whether that's reducing emissions,
protecting animal health, or responding to biosecurity risks.
But the real test will be in the delivery
If implemented well, these changes will support a system that's
faster, more proportionate, and better aligned with the
realities that farmers face today.
Ultimately, this is about enabling the New Zealand dairy farming
industry
to continue producing world-leading food while meeting the
expectations of both consumers and global markets.
Thank you for your time, and I would welcome questions.
Steve. Brilliant, Sue. Thank you again. Nice to see you again.
Dairy NZ and DKanz made very strong submissions on the Gene Tech
bill, which also covers medicines
and GMOs. I know we're talking about agriculture and veterinary compounds.
But one of your more compelling points you made was we need to be cautious
of ceding regulatory sovereignty to
overseas jurisdictions because the circumstances in our
country in terms of agriculture and production are unique, i.e., we're
far more dependent on export markets than Australia even.
Yep.
So I think you make the point here
that overseas assessments should help inform a
more efficient New Zealand process,
but they shouldn't be the default, that if you've had two
jurisdictions approve something, we should just accept it.
We still need to have the lens of local situation
before we would accept a new compound or veterinary medicine.
I think that that, in terms of
an assessment of what is the recognized overseas
regulator's data set and what they're providing-
Yeah
... it is common sense to look at that.
Absolutely.
Look at the-
No question
... the depth and the scope of the science and the evidence,
recognize that there are difference in farming systems between different markets-
Yeah
... and manage that process. Our overseas markets
regulators would look to the ACVM system to do that,
logically anyway.
Yeah.
What we're looking for is a system that gives trust and confidence to those market
regulators, that they can recognize the
ability to recognize other jurisdictions in terms of what they're
doing.
Mm.
But because our farming systems are different from a lot of the
markets that we sell into, obviously that needs to be taken into account
in terms of risk.
Yeah. So retaining regulatory sovereignty.
We haven't used that language, but certainly the farming systems
and the risks that are applied in New Zealand uniquely relative to other
markets, it has to be taken into account.
Yeah.
Right.
Sue.
Hi, and thank you. I was interested in your comment regarding the
clear emergency use pathway.
Mm.
And this was something that I actually raised with officials prior to the
submission, but hearing from people, and we were given an assurance
because my, for example, with you guys, my example was that if
we suddenly got a breakout of foot-and-mouth and we were aware there was a bolus
available in France, could we get it?
Was there provision that we could fast-track something through really quickly
because it was going to have a significant effect on not only the animal
welfare, but also on the economy,
and w-we were told yes, weren't we?
I-
Yeah.
I think-
Well, I'm sure there'll be some-
There'll be different officials.
Yeah, but you-
So that's the EPA, and we're dealing with MPV.
Well, sure- surely it's the same theory.
Yeah. I think-
So are you saying it's, that there is a c- that that is not the case?
I think that we're looking for that-
Assurance
... that assurance-
... certainly through the regulations-
Sorry, I was... I-
... in terms of it.
So there's a need to make sure that the bill which is enabling
allows that provision, and then the regulations that underpin
it actually implement it in a way that does mean that it's
actually timely.
Right.
So we're looking for that assurance going forward.
So the bill plus the provisions that-
And the regulations
... the regulations that underpin it.
Yeah. And, and our-
Second opinions
... our general comment would be there is huge
progress in the bill, especially with in relation to
HASNO as well. But the devil will be in the detail of the regulations that
actually underpin it. And they're certainly the area that we're most
interested in.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Carol.
Yeah, thank you.
For your two submissions today.
Yeah, good effort.
Yeah.
So we'll move on.
We've got Dairy NZ, and...
No, sorry, we just had Dairy NZ.
Sorry.
We've got Animal and Plant Health Association of New Zealand, AHFAND.
And Emma and Tanya
are back.
Hello again.
Hello.
So we've
allocated 15 minutes,
ladies, so fire away.
All
right. Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak again.
So my name's Emma Waller. I'm a board member of AHFANDs, and I have Tanya
Cast, our technical advisor for AHFANDs with me.
So as mentioned this morning in our submission on the HASNO Amendment
Bill, our members are applicants in this regulatory system, and that
ACVM Amendment Bill directly affects their ability to bring new,
safe, innovative, and effective products to New Zealand.
The points raised in my submission about the importance of the HASNO bill and why
it matters for our members, as well as the primary, sorry, as well as
the entire primary sector, applies equally to this bill.
To reiterate my comment earlier this morning, we encourage you to consider
the HASNO and ACVM Amendment Bill submissions by
AHFANDs together. As with the HASNO Amendment Bill,
the ACVM Amendment Bill is a positive first step towards
modernizing the regulatory system.
But targeted changes to the bill and robust supporting regulations are
essential to ensure they deliver the proportionate,
transparent, and efficient approvals pathways that Cabinet intended
and industry need
I'll take our submission as read, and in this session, I'll focus on the
critical priority changes, the ones with the greatest impact on investment
decisions, manufacturing, supply chains, and the ability to bring novel
products to New Zealand.
As with HSNO, time frames are ranked as a high priority
for our members across the ACVM bill.
Strengthening both bills in this area is essential for transparency,
oversight, and accountability. This is especially important
because ACVM and MPI have no independent performance
monitor.
The act must set clear expectations.
Applicants need predictable timelines
to make long-term investment decisions, and farmers, growers, and
veterinarians need timely access to the tools that protect
productivity and manage pests and diseases.
While our members support agility through regulations, maximum
time frames should sit in primary legislation to maintain parliamentary oversight,
and if they remain in regulation, the act must clearly prescribe what those
regulations must include.
We also need safeguards around time limit waivers and explicit
rules for when the clock stops and starts.
As drafted, any time frame can be varied, even after
expiry and without applicant agreement,
creating a real risk of unjustified delay.
Our members are asking for waivers to require clear justification and applicant
agreement, and for the clock to stop only when a written
information request is issued and restart when the information is
received, with both steps notified in
writing. As the representative body for a
significant share of New Zealand's agricultural manufacturing and importing
companies, AFANZ requests early exposure drafts to all
ACVM time frame regulations, and we are asking that the
committee address gaps in the bill to ensure the system delivers
transparency, certainty, and accountability.
Proportionate assessments through overseas expertise is essential
for improving efficiency and getting safe, modern tools to New
Zealand faster.
AFANZ members support the intent of provisions in the bill and is seeking
targeted redrafting to ensure MPI consistently uses
recognized overseas assessments for the same product in use,
focusing its effort on risks unique to New Zealand.
Our submission proposes redrafting to strengthen the
criteria for recognition so they are evidence-based, set in
regulation, and open to requests from any person, ensure
any withdrawal of recognition is also evidence-based, and enable
greater use of overseas assessments for low-risk chemistry and
manufacturing variations to avoid unnecessary regulatory burden.
For companion animal products, our members support a role of two,
where two recognized overseas approvals can be leveraged when New
Zealand-specific risks are low. The bills
transfer significant power to agencies without the corresponding
transparency and oversight needed to maintain trust in the system.
While operational delegation can improve efficiency, key decisions
must retain ministerial or parliamentary oversight, and our
members are asking for early exposure drafts of
regulations to ensure delegated powers are
exercised transparently and they are workable on the ground.
In addition to these critical changes, our submission identifies high-priority
amendments relating to clarity on the
definition of approved information and to further strengthen
the data assessment framework.
We also highlight other priority
areas for consideration, including
the long-term question of a one-regulator model, retaining the New
Zealand Gazette as a public notification method, annual
reporting to include performance from the date an application is lodged to
the date of decision,
stronger compliance before consent cancellation,
greater protection of confidentiality with overseas assessments,
and shorter time frames for import permits for agricultural compound
clearances.
All proposed changes are set out in part four of our submission.
And I'd like to reiterate that our members are not proposing a lowering of
standards.
It's about smart regulation that protects people
and the environment while enabling New Zealand to thrive.
A modern system allows regulators to spend more time on genuinely
high-risk applications and less time reassessing products that are already
approved by trusted overseas regulators.
Our members are not asking for a free pass or a system that cuts corners.
They're asking for a system that's predictable, transparent, and risk-based.
As with our submission for the HSNO Amendment Bill, our members request the
opportunity to participate in meaningful engagement as regulations
are developed.
New Zealand is a small market. Getting the legislative framework right
is a win for everyone. It backs innovation and investment,
reduces costs to end users, frees regulator capacity, and
gets our farmers, growers, and veterinarians better and faster
access to a broad toolkit needed to fight pests and manage
diseases.
Our members, farmers, and growers all share an interest in reducing
environmental impact, increasing productivity, and growing our economy.
These tools are essential to meeting these goals while closing the gap with
international counterparts who already have access to these important products.
Thank you again for the opportunity to present today, and we're happy to take
questions.
Thank you. Go to Steve for the first question.
So in terms of the rule of two, isn't there a risk that you
just pick the two most favorable overseas
jurisdictions that have approved a chemical?
Or a compound drug
Well, my understanding, it would be a specific list of trusted regulators.
We're not going to
use obscure countries that have approved certain products.
So within that specific list, can you take any two of those?
So say the EU doesn't approve it, but Australia and Canada do, then you'll choose
Australia and Canada.
That seems reasonable. Australia-
Is that reasonable, or wouldn't you want
the most robust evidence-based
evaluations to decide whether it's appropriate for use here, irrespective--
Absolutely, we should use information that other countries have done and
evaluations. But shouldn't the regulator be assessing
the robustness of those evaluations and the scientific basis of those
evaluations, not simply that two of them have decided to say
yes?
Well, I think the robustness of the regulators would be part of a
consideration to put those regulators on the list to begin with.
Oh, yeah.
And just to reiterate, it's for companion animals as well.
So cats and dogs, it's not
animals.
Yeah.
But isn't there a problem that, and I
appreciate that you guys combine the HASDA and the ACVM, but we're supposed to
be distinguishing them, which is challenging for our brains.
And isn't the risk that
where you've got a more laissez-faire regulatory determination made in a
country where they perceive that particular substance is not
a concern for them, but it might be more of a concern for us, that we
would be
foolish to not
give greater oversight. Because if you have a default that any two
from that favored list means it's going to be approved here,
then is that sufficient safeguard?
Well, I think it's important to
recognize that it will be the devil's in the detail of the regulations.
Exactly.
Exactly. So this is something that we want to be involved in
as well.
Sure.
Yeah, absolutely. And it's also, I
think, important to note that
the two regulator
rule of two, yes, you take those assessments, but there's still
a level of review by ACVM, and it's having that
proportionate assessment approach as well.
So yes, they still need to look at if there's anything in those
assessments that maybe trigger something or miss something that is
unique to New Zealand, even for a companion animal.
So we still need that, yeah.
Well, yeah. We're not saying you-
Okay
... you ignore those specific risks to New Zealand at all.
That's useful to understand.
Yeah.
So we retain regulatory sovereignty.
It's not just going to be if it's approved in those two places, it's approved here.
No. There's steps to go through first.
Yeah.
Good to hear. Yeah.
Well, I've said with the previous bill too, because it alleviates some of the
initial stuff, but then you've still got to apply, especially with a chemical, like
if you're using it in the desert in Australia and you're going to use it-
Mm
... in, I don't know, Waiouru here, it's going to be different, and it'll react
differently.
Sure.
So it needs to be tested under specific circumstances.
Right.
Animals would be the same.
Yeah.
So, councils are notorious for
putting in requests for information when the time frames
are-
Yes
... looking to run out.
That's another question, too.
Do you have
any examples of requests for more information
happening where you suspect it's just because the
ministry doesn't have
or hasn't given the attention to the particular application or...?
Don't have any specific examples
that I can think of from members, but sometimes the requests come through just
for more time with no reasoning why-
Right
... that time is being requested.
I've also had some feedback from membership that some of the additional
information requests aren't actually beneficial
to the technical risk assessments that are being done.
They're just
maybe
like proofreading kind of requests.
So they're not substantial to actually the technical assessments.
So having some wraparounds around this is where we come through as well
with what approved information actually is.
If there's some greater clarity on what's required, there are
current guidelines in terms of
filling out applications and guidelines for that.
But the
membership still feels that there's some clarity that could be provided.
So when there is additional information requests, it's very
specific to what actually matters for technical and risk assessments.
Thank you.
Mm-hmm.
Any further questions?
No.
Very good. Thank you very much for your time today.
Thanks again. Thank you.
And I think you're done with us for the day.
Free.
Thank you.
Very good. All right. We'll move on because the Pig and Poultry
Branch are online, of the New Zealand Veterinary Association.
So we'll
go straight to them.
Pig and Poultry,
Nick.
Pig and Poultry Branch of the New Zealand Veterinary Association.
I think it's Dr. Dawn Mills.
Here we go.
Ah.
Morning, Dawn. How are you?
Morning.
Welcome to the-
Morning
... Primary Production Select Committee.
Thank you.
I've never done anything like this before, so I apologize in advance if
I make any procedural errors.
No.
But I'm very pleased to have the opportunity.
It's something I feel very strongly about.
So I'm a veterinarian,
obviously a member of the NZVA, um- I've always been a clinical
veterinarian. I love working with animals.
I love helping them, and helping them produce for New Zealand.
And for the last 20 years, I've ended up as a veterinarian in
commercial poultry, which is a very interesting sector.
It tends to operate a bit under the radar.
Not many people know a lot about it unless they're involved with it.
So I'll just very briefly give you some figures.
So the New Zealand industry is very important to New Zealand, but it's very
small. It's
4 million commercial hens. Australia has 24 million.
The USA has 374 million laying hens, and
the UK, 43 million. In the broilers, we have
120 million broilers per year, with 20 to
30 million alive at any one time.
And the States has 9.22 billion,
and the UK, 120 million.
So we're very small, and this has been mentioned before.
And also, we have a good health status, so normally our birds are
very healthy.
But in the past
20 years, there's been a big push to free-range egg farming,
which a lot of vets would not agree with.
But
anyway, that's what's happened, and that's led to a resurgence in a lot of
diseases that were not seen when birds
were in cages, which I'm not advocating, or in barns,
which I do. So they're exposed to parasites and
viruses that they're not exposed to when they're housed.
So, these diseases require treatment on animal
welfare and on commercial grounds.
So,
New Zealand exports quite a lot of chicken meat, and they also export
quite a lot of high-health breeder chickens to Southeast Asia,
which is maybe not commonly known.
So it is
small, but it is an important export earner for New
Zealand.
And how many people here have not eaten chicken or eggs in the
past week? I don't think there'd be many.
So it's very important to the local economy as well.
So we accept the vital role that regulators
play in ensuring products are suitable, are safe to use, and do
not compromise trade agreements.
But we're seeking a more balanced risk approach.
The current approach puts all the emphasis on risk of approval and
none on animal welfare and risk of non-approval, and the
amendments as written will not change this.
The Agricultural Compounds and New Medicines Act deals with the prevention
or management of risks from use of agricultural compounds to the
trade in primary produce,
animal welfare, and agricultural security.
In fact, the act, as currently applied, is causing significant animal
welfare issues, significant progress towards antimicrobial resistance,
and significant cost barrier issues.
1,100 hens died while awaiting special circumstances
approval for amoxicillin.
Our group met with the ACVM team in September 2025.
There has been no change. They don't see a problem.
The route they suggested is the one that allowed 1,100 bird deaths.
I have to say I should-
We should not need to use a special circumstances approval for
what are considered core antimicrobials for poultry.
The special circumstances approvals are expensive, which places an
additional burden on New Zealand poultry farmers and reduces the
productivity of New Zealand Inc.
The legislation has not changed since 1997.
And I must point out I'm not an expert on the legislation, but
I'm an expert on not wanting to see my customers'
birds dying before their eyes and not being able to do anything.
But the outcomes have become much worse.
There is nothing in the ACVM Amendment Bill to reduce the
labyrinthine, unclear, and often despotic processes
required to register a product, or even to obtain an
emergency special circumstances approval.
Have you looked at the forms required on the website?
I don't even understand some of what they're asking for.
If she doesn't, we're in trouble.
Amoxicillin. Australian registrants were approached this year
but declined to enter the long, torturous, and expensive registration
process required for the small amount of drug that would be used.
And this is the critical point. Our birds are healthy.
They don't often need antibiotic.
But when they need it, they need it tomorrow, not in three weeks'
time. And because our market is so small,
it has to be easy to register things, or people
are currently just saying, "Sorry, we're not going to be
bothered. It's not worth our while. We're losing money.
We have to pay
thousands of dollars, and we just can't make any headway." So
this is the situation we're in, and it's very desperate.
Mm.
So
the amoxicillin registrants
declined to enter the long, torturous, and expensive
registration process required for the small amount of drug that would be used.
Broilect, which is a
feed additive which
hopefully reduces antibiotic use, the nice Japanese
man said to me, "Now, for New Zealand, we had a project going back a few
years to see how we could introduce Broilect to the local market.
Unfortunately, our project did not reach its goal due to the regulatory
challenge with competitive exclusion type products."
So that was his polite way of saying they couldn't.
And so competitive exclusion products are
specially selected bacteria that are used to
reduce the need for antibiotic in poultry.
Probiotics, are they-
That was someone else mentioned
... are they probiotics?
Probiotics and
prebiotics. Yeah. There-
Yes
... there's a number of different types of compounds, but yeah.
But they're by nature not very defined in their
composition, which is the problem.
But they're used extensively overseas.
Mm.
There is nothing in the ACVM Amendment Bill that requires the ACVM to use
overseas data, thereby avoiding the need to duplicate trials conducted
overseas in similar markets.
And I heard the previous, I heard Aiken's an- and the question
saying that New Zealand conditions are different.
New Zealand birds are not different.
They process amoxicillin exactly the same as any bird anywhere in
the world.
Yeah.
No difference. We're talking about an antibiotic that has been
used for tens of years, in this case.
The same with the, the probiotics and postbiotics.
New products, certainly there's a, a need for different trials, w-
but all things are affected by the same problems at the
moment.
For example, animal ethics approval is required for a field trial of a vaccine
used routinely and on a large scale overseas.
Why? The alternate pathway proposed is only available with
Australia for small an- animal medications.
That, that's an Australian decision, not a New Zealand one.
In the antibiotic area, there are 23 products registered in New Zealand
for use in poultry. Of these, six are products for use in
water and it is a veterinary fact that when you
have sick birds, you need to treat them in water because they keep drinking when
they stop eating.
Of these six, two are the same active, tylosin.
This leaves five antibiotics available, which sounds good on paper.
We have oxytetracycline with a 10-day egg withhold.
We have-
Uh, Dawn.
Yes.
Dawn, I'm, I'm just gonna interrupt you there so we can ask you questions before we
run out of time.
Yeah, sure.
Is that all right?
So-
Can I just go through what, what we would like?
So the ACVM Amendment Bill needs to mandate an essential-
It's all in your submission.
Uh-
Is it not? Is it in your wr- it's in your written submission, though.
No, it's not.
It's not. Okay.
It's not. An essential veterinary medicines registration pathway for small
industries such as poultry, deer, bees, pigs, aquaculture.
Acceptance of data from trusted overseas regulators, legislated
decision timeframes, especially where animal welfare is at risk,
fees and data requirements scaled to market size,
and a dedicated approval pathway for products already approved
overseas and needed for animal welfare, disease control, food
security and antimicrobial stewardship. Right. That's me. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. All right.
I don't believe anyone's contesting-
Please
... that a medicine will have the same effect on a chicken in America as it will in
New Zealand. I mean, that's not questioned, you know, so your point is well made
there. But can I just clarify, are you saying an an- amoxicillin is not approved
for use on poultry in New Zealand?
No, there's no registered amoxicillin product for use in New
Zealand because the use is so low, and the re- registration
requirements so onerous-
Mm
... unpredictable and costly, that the registrants just throw up their hands and
say, "No, can't be bothered."
Yeah.
And so we can get it with a special circumstances approval, but that
means you have to have sick or dying birds that don't respond to the
chlortetracycline we have, and then they need a amoxicillin,
'cause we do, um, cultures and
sensitivity tests and we, we practice responsible medicine,
but w- we don't have any tools with which to, to treat our
birds and it's, it's horrifying.
Quick follow, follow-up. Um, what you guys are facing, and it must be
terrifying right now, the, uh, bird flu risk-
I'm just gonna have more questions
... um, we're acutely aware of that.
Well-
Do you think that-
Antibiotics will have no effect on that. It's a virus.
No, no.
Antibiotic, that's the whole point.
Let me ask, ask you a question.
Yeah, sure. Sorry.
Are you concerned that there's barriers to the use of vaccines
if they become available or any such method that might become available to
deal with that through the existing regime?
Absolutely. But, um, we fort- we're very fortunate to have
a very good company in the poultry sphere, Pacific Vet, who, who does a
lot of work for us. But, um, the barriers
to vaccinating for avian influenza are trade barriers, which is
n- not your department. But, yes, it would be a big
barrier.
Yeah. All right. Uh, thank you very much, Dawn.
We've, we've come, we've run over time.
Um, but I really appreciate your very
comprehensive submission.
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
Absolutely.
It was very good. Very good.
Thank you. Thank you for your time.
We're gonna move on to Concerned Farmers NZ
via Zoom, and we've got, uh, Dr. Ruth Williams and
Mr. Nick Collins.
Good afternoon. Um-
Good afternoon.
Um, welcome to the Problem Reduction Select Committee.
Um, we've set aside 10 minutes for your submission,
so fire away.
Thank you. Well, um, good afternoon and thank you for the opportunity to
speak. I'll set the ball rolling on behalf of Concerned Farmers New
Zealand. I'm Dr. Ruth Williams, veterinary surgeon and
sheep and beef farmer from Banks Peninsula.
I am co-founder of Concerned Farmers New Zealand, a group of about 200
farmers and growers from throughout New Zealand and from all types of
farming.
Our supporters are only too aware that re- regulatory change comes with
benefits and risk. It is with the risks in mind that I wish to
speak. In particular, the aspect of this bill that appears to open the back
door to the potential introduction of unregulated gene
technology. Farmers-
Sorry?
Carry on.
The farmers and growers who support us are neither pro nor anti-gene
technology but recognize there are risks associated with it that
must be addressed. We need good outcomes from regulation,
ones that give clarity throughout the food chain that regulation
is an important part of our assurance.
Good regulation is not prohibitive but
protective to our land, stock, and ability to trade.
To prevent calamities, not to prevent progress.
Yet with this bill, our input has been missing.
Once again, farmers and growers have not been meaningfully consulted
nor given sufficient time to fully comprehend what the changes to
regulation within the bill and the HASNO amendment bill would mean.
Compounding this, the EPA would have increased discretionary power
through the HASNO amendment bill that would effectively further cut farmers
out of decision-making, amounting to the EPA being given a
blank check on decisions that affect farmers and their businesses.
Thank you.
We oppose the lack of consultation.
We also oppose the increased power awarded to EPA as
not likely to result in the best outcomes for farmers and growers.
There must be involvement in decision-making by those who have the
most to lose.
The ACBM and HASNO amendment bills have been presented as a simple
case of improving access to agricultural products, when in
reality the bills are interrelated and complex with backdoor
risks. Farmers must be given the opportunity to understand
how these bills relate. We therefore oppose both bills until
such time as full and genuine consultation has taken
place and clarification given.
Furthermore, both ACBM and HASNO amendment bills are dependent on
passing the Gene Technology Bill, a bill that has stalled.
This raises the issue that any amendments in the proposed
ACBM and HASNO that refer to the Gene
Technology Bill in anticipation of it being passed
must be removed, as the Gene Technology Bill is not actually law.
My understanding is it is highly irregular to present a foregone
conclusion as part of a proposed bill.
We therefore ask that all such references are
removed.
Of particular concern, with significant flow-on ramifications for
farmers and growers, is how biological compounds will be
regulated and approved under the proposed bill.
It appears New Zealand is potentially setting itself up for an own goal in
World Cup year through allowing approvals by overseas
regulators to be recognized here.
The US, EU, and Australia have much more permissive
frameworks, in effect creating
a drive-through for some GM products to be
approved purely based on approval in another country
where environmental, farming, and market sensitivities stack up
quite differently. This is totally unacceptable.
New Zealand must maintain its sovereign decision-making ability
and ensure that all GM products are regulated and consulted on
under this bill.
For example, if passed, it appears an overseas regulator
could approve the use of gene-edited pesticides unregulated
with the potential of leaving an unintended trail of GMOs
and proliferation in the field. The resulting risk to
biodiversity through loss of soil microbiome and
potential biological collapse is real.
Some would say it is a greater risk than climate change, and
both could kill us.
Lastly, I would like to particularly draw the committee's attention to the
increasing number of findings reported by scientists of
unintended changes with CRISPR-Cas9 gene-editing technique,
used most commonly in agricultural biological compounds.
A conversation with my brother-in-law, David Williams, a professor of
neurobiology at the UCLA School of Medicine,
very clearly reveals why New Zealand must regulate all GMOs,
including gene-edited organisms.
I will send his statement and references as a supplementary document
and finish with an excerpt from it.
The new GMO methods mean that it is easier and faster to
cause harm, making regulation of GMOs even more
essential, not less. There is now substantial
literature published by the very top biomedical journals reporting
unintended changes with CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing.
It looks like Cas9 can be effectively quite toxic.
At the least, there should be rigorous testing of gene-edited products to
screen for off-target effects.
Given this literature, it would be incredibly foolish and
irresponsible to pass legislation that does not include
such testing.
Thank you. I hand over to my colleague, Nick.
You're on mute, Nick.
And can we ask if they'll leave time for questions would be helpful?
Sorry. Apologies.
Good afternoon. I'm Nick Collins, a retired dairy farmer and now dry stock
farmer from the King Country. On behalf of Concerned Farmers NZ,
we have significant concerns around the market, brand, and economic
risks associated with the proposed HASNO and
ACBM amendment bills, as these bills cannot be treated
in isolation. I urge the select committee to seriously consider
the six key issues in our submissions to protect the
long-term prosperity of our primary sector.
We see the extent of the proposed changes as a serious threat to our current
position, both domestically and internationally,
as a preferred supplier of primary produce based on provenance,
integrity, trust, and value. Our farmers respect this
hard-earned natural advantage. Our competitors see it as
unfair.
We see it as our global point of difference, providing an opportunity to
build on this exponentially, creating a sweet spot of efficiency and
resilience across multiple sectors,
multiple levels from biodiversity, plant, animal, and human welfare,
economic prosperity, and global sovereignty.
Fortune Business Insights is highlighting growth in the non-GMO food market
on current trajectory to expand from 995
billion this year to 2,624
billion in 2034, a compounding annual growth rate
of 12.94%.
The increasing awareness amongst consumers worldwide, which saw a
significant shift post-COVID-19 of the correlation
between nutrition and health, means well-informed consumers demand
food with transparency, purity, and trust, with this
placed ahead of price.
The outcomes from the GMO summit in Germany highlighted three key
messages of concern relating to regulatory changes.
Considerable uncertainty around safety margins of field trials and
lack of containment. Improved methods of detecting GMOs in
food is developing rapidly. Consumer demand for GMO-free
transparency is high and also increasing rapidly.
The EU decision to adopt legislation on new genomic techniques
provides us with a golden opportunity to tap into a rapidly growing market of
consumer demand for non-GMO products.
We will lead the way, not be left behind, as stated by critics of our
current regulatory system. We need strict regulation to
protect our high-value production systems rather than be left
languishing on the scrap heap of the commodity market.
Take Fonterra Organics as an example of securing access into high-value
markets, currently providing over 40%
premium to producers who have also built climate and
economic resilience into their farm systems, with some certified
farms generating a $7,000 per hectare profit margin.
These systems are robust and highly profitable due to
synergies of living biological systems.
Supply of certified organic milk has doubled in the last five years
and needs to double again to meet current demand, hence the
expansion into the South Island.
Fonterra Organic customers see our 100% GMO-free, grass-fed,
free-range New Zealand pure brand as the complete package of
trust, integrity, and value, backed by provenance and
stewardship.
The GMO-free component of this to them is a no-brainer.
The current proposed changes to the definition of a field trial for genetically
modified organisms, along with deleting the requirement to
remove any heritable material from the definition of
a field test, exposes us to widespread
contamination.
This would commit us to the treadmill and volatility of a
low-value commodity market.
Our freedom of choice for all growers, by no means just organic,
must be treasured beyond all doubt, and any proposed
changes to regulation must protect and secure our competitive
advantage for our future prosperity-
Nick, I'm sorry. I'm going to have to interrupt because we're well over
time,
unfortunately.
Sorry.
But thank you very much, both of you, for your submission
and taking the time to give an oral
submission today.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Right. We're going to move on to FMC New Zealand
Limited.
And we've got Steven Solter again.
Welcome again, Steven.
Thank you for welcoming me back.
Thank you. We've got 10 minutes. Away you go.
I've got a lot less to say on this one than I did the HSNO one, so hopefully I
should fall well under that 10.
Brilliant.
So, on the ACVM's bill, there's been a
few other speakers mention delegations of powers and
authority so far.
One thing that I think needs to follow that delegation is some direction about
how those powers are used. So,
one of the purposes of this bill is to enact the
recommendations from the MFR report.
One of those recommendations was to increase the use and better design of
exemptions from registration and self-assessable changes.
In its current form, that power is delegated, but that direction to actually
increase and seek further opportunities for
what could be exempted from registration or other self-assessable changes,
to me, that's lacking. I think there's an opportunity to
direct how those powers should be used.
I've laid that out in section 10 of my submission.
There's a list there. It sort of captures the themes rather than
exact wording.
I
think you'll agree with me, most of them are sensible.
I'll just briefly highlight the
D that I've got there about harmonization with Australia.
So, I can't remember the exact question earlier, but for
me, there's a really big opportunity in the chemistry and
manufacturing area. So, when I say area, ACVM sort of
have subtopics. So, one is chemistry and manufacturing.
Is the product stable? Is it going to,
still in two years' time, perform as it does
once it's just been manufactured?
The others are more efficacy, crop safety,
residues. But the chemistry and manufacturing,
at the moment, there are still misalignments between New Zealand's and Australia's
data requirements. Realistically, the dossier that the Australian
regulators say, "Yep, this convinces us the product's going to be stable.
It's manufactured to this level of purity." There's
opportunity there to remove the New Zealand specific requirements
and make it easier and more encouraging for
companies to both maintain existing products as they have to
go through formulation changes or sourcing changes,
and then also introduce new ones.
The other topic that I
really touch on in my submission is data protection.
So I know that that wasn't something that the bill itself really raised, but
because we're amending the ACVM Act, it felt like the appropriate time to
highlight that in the recent EU Free Trade
Agreement, the clause that we agreed to
around data protection,
that is also misaligned with what's currently in the ACVM Act.
So other trade agreements, that's not the case.
CPTPP,
it, it, it, it's lines up exactly but at the moment,
if I as a registrant bring in a new product with
an existing active ingredient in it, so it's not
eligible for 10 years data protection under the current ACVM Act.
If it's for a new use and I've provided new data to show that it
works, show that it's safe for the crop, show what the residues are likely to
be,
under what we've agreed to with EU, I think 10 years is what I should
be eligible for, whereas at the moment, under the ACVM Act, it would only be
five.
Little bit more commentary on data protection.
Obviously, the argument against extending it is that it keeps
generics out of the market longer, so the price is higher for growers.
But the argument for it basically boils down to
making it more attractive to invest in those additional
uses,
and bring that innovation in, which based on what we've heard from the likes of
James earlier from Vegetable Council-
Yes
... I-i, in my view,
we kind of need to swing that way a little bit based on where things are a-a-and
encourage that investment a bit more.
So I, I think it's appropriate as even aside from the
trade perspective, which I won't get into any further really.
Last thing I'll just quickly mention, Syngenta earlier
highlighted, look, we've got a g- global research and development budget,
that's the same for all of the global companies.
The things are considered at a global level, so
just because a product would work in New Zealand doesn't mean it's gonna be
pursued. The difficulty or ease of getting it over the
line has to be weighed against other opportunities all around the world.
And so I, I guess it's kind of like being in, in parliament balancing a budget.
You don't have infinite money to fund everything you'd like to.
Exact same thing here. You can't pursue every opportunity all at once because you,
you don't have unlimited resources to do so, and you have to prioritize.
It'd be good if New Zealand could
be a higher priority by having more favorable settings.
Yeah.
A- and that's all I've got to say. Thank you.
Thanks, Steven. I've got a question.
You've mentioned about, stability-
Yep
... of product.
Are you talking about the shelf life or just the
denaturing of, of the molecules within the product?
Y- yeah. A- a- all of that, both.
Okay.
Yep. Yep. So the requirements
for New Zealand, the, the default ones, they differ from Australia.
So i- in my mind, that's an area c-- because
it's generally independent of,
say, different soil types in New Zealand versus Australia, where you may have
differences in efficacy, for example.
Uh, I think that, that, that's chemistry stability, um,
shelf life stuff is, is where there's an opportunity to align closer.
Thank you.
Any further questions?
I do.
Dennis.
I have one just on that basis. A little bit aligned to that, but how difficult
is it, um, uh, I don't know if you heard the previous submitter about the
poultry vaccine, uh, antibiotics rather.
Um, and I was just wondering how difficult is it to get
those, uh, medications here? Or h- what's the
timeframe from overseas if, if they're required?
How, how long does that take?
An emergency, do you mean?
Yeah, yeah.
Y- yeah, so
I'm not in the vet med space. I, I would say though that if a, if
product isn't physically here, if it's in Australia, if it's an
absolute emergency, you can probably get it in a, a couple of weeks.
But if it's not in Australia-
Mm-hmm
... if, if I'm having to get it at, if I'm having to get it from
Europe or North America-
Yeah
... you're probably looking a couple of months.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Thank you. Thanks, that's helpful.
Thanks very much, Steven, um, for your time today.
Um, and, uh,
we will consider your submissions when we, uh,
deliberate, um, next month.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Right, we're gonna move on to Hort New Zealand.
Rebecca,
Simon, and
Quinn Hea, is it?
Thank you. Um, we won't introduce ourselves again unless you wish.
I'm joined by Felicity at Hort NZ, and Simon again, the kiwifruit
grower from Bay of Plenty.
Um, so we'll briefly highlight two points in our submission, um, and
then welcome questions.
Yep.
Uh, as I mentioned before, horticulture industry is very important to New Zealand,
seven point five billion, wish to double farm gate value.
That's right.
We do support the government's objectives of improving growers' access to crop
protection products, and we do support the direction of this reform, but our
recommendations are intended to help ensure the bill delivers the outcome it
was designed to achieve whilst maintaining robust mitigation
measures for human health and trade.
So the two areas we'll cover, uh, again, as this morning and many submitters
have outlined, is around international alignment and harmonization
So relying on overseas data, approvals, particularly from Australia
and other comparable countries,
because much of the science on plant health and human safety efficacy
residues has already been assessed overseas.
ACVM uses some international data, but this should be extended to all aspects of
the data needed for approvals.
And as some of the submitters have talked about, one of the biggest pain points we
know is around in the registration of crop protection products,
as companies must undertake bespoke specific chemistry and manufacturing trials
when the product's already registered
internationally that's been assessed for this purpose.
And because we're a small market, that's a real struggle.
Therefore, reduces the capacity to register, and
then our growers don't have access to these tools.
So allowing international assessments will reduce duplication and data requirements
and speed up approvals,
and enables growers faster access and more timely to crop protection products.
So the bill must go further to enable the use of international data, and
whilst the bill currently allows for officials to have regard to
applicable assessments from a recognized overseas regulator, this wording does not
automatically form part of decision-making.
And as our submission outlines, further amendment to the bill is
required to make international assessments the default starting position
instead of have regard to. The wording should be amended
to the director general must, as a starting point, rely on international
assessments unless there is sufficient New Zealand-specific
circumstances not to do so.
So our second point is the structural alignment between HSNO, EPA and
ACVM and MPI. We touched on this a little bit this morning, but I'll go
into a little bit more detail. So whilst the bills do bring about reform,
there are still two separate systems regulating crop protection products, and
the changes to improve processes are largely administrative.
This means it does not necessarily result in faster approvals.
But if time frames are shifted into regulations, there should be one set of
regulations for time frames that govern across both HSNO
and ACVM. A single joint regulation would enable better
coordination between EPA and MPI, create consistent
timelines, and provide a clearer basis for accountability across the
approval pipeline. This would enable companies to know when their products will be
registered, and therefore growers would know when they have access to crop
protection tools that they need from this single joint
regulation. So a full list of our recommended amendments are in the
bill.
We ask that you carefully consider our recommendations for the amended wording, and
thank you for your time.
Thank you very much.
We'll go straight to Steve Abel with the first question.
Do you mean, like, a single desk that you go to that then gets put
through
the two bills, the regulatory framework, or do you mean combining the HSNO Act and
the ACVM Act?
So we originally wished to combine, but we see that these are two separate, but
what we mean is more in the regulations.
Yeah.
So there's that clarity. If both are 50 working days, that would help.
At the moment, it's not clear to us of what might happen down further, but I'll
let Felicity will talk to that point.
Yeah, 'cause in the, in the future, it could be one regulator, but at the
moment, given there's still two separate ones-
Mm
... yeah, it's whether the regulations issued under each act can speak to each
other better.
So it's not a single desk. You don't just go, "I wanna import this
compound. I'll take it to
this desk," and they'll decide which
part of the regulatory system has to assess it.
You have to go and apply separately.
Currently, that's assessed. And we believe that the bill, uh,
doesn't seek to change that, so that's currently for all crop protection products.
You go to both regulators, and that's what causes the confusion in timelines and
therefore delays and therefore ability for our growers to access products because
one may be faster or slower than the other, one may be held up, one may be
done years in advance, so.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Probably lots.
Look, thank you very much for your time today. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you in particular for the quality
of the-
Yeah
... submission.
Good.
Great to see you.
Right, we'll move on. We've got the SPCA.
Frequent flyers. Here we go.
Welcome again.
Thank you.
We've, um, allocated 10 minutes, so-
Good
... um, away you go.
Thank you very much for having us back.
As you know, I'm Anya, this is Christine, um, and we'll just get straight into
it. So SPCA absolutely sees the value in amending the
ACVM Act, um, in terms of efficiencies, and we, we have
heard many submitters talk about that today, so we don't need to labor that point.
But we do think that animal welfare should be prioritized
along with improving efficiencies under this, under this amendment bill.
Now, the ACVM system is explicitly intended to
protect animal welfare
in addition to public health and trade and primary produce and agricultural
compounds. But it explicitly says animal welfare.
And so we are therefore deeply concerned that it wasn't a topic
that was considered in the stakeholder groups to actually
work on this bill,
and we were not included in any of the consultation leading up to this bill.
Yet we submit on every single ACVM
consultation. They know of our very, very strong interest-
Mm
... in this bill. Um, and so it is highly disappointed.
So today we're gonna talk about some of the welfare implications of this ACVM
amendment, but I'm gonna hand over to Christine.
Uh, I'm just gonna walk through three key things, um, and have a couple
examples just to illustrate our concerns.
Um, so we, we understand the bill will empower the director general
to, um, exempt compounds or classes of compounds from
registration, and-
As Anya noted, our biggest concern is with animal welfare, and therefore the
assessment that goes into these exemptions and decisions to exempt, and is
there a robust enough, a thorough enough animal welfare
assessment done?
For example,
biologically active compounds like methane inhibitors,
if they're allowed to bypass full registration, this
could undermine animal welfare because we just don't have a lot of information on
them. We don't have longitudinal data impacts on welfare.
They could be beneficial. They
might not cause harm, but the key is we don't know.
And so therefore, we want to see more robust assessment prior
to these exemptions to give more confidence and surety that
we can minimize those risks to animal welfare.
Additionally,
we are concerned about products that are currently exempt under the ACVM
Act, and we couldn't tell there's a lot going on in the Amendment Bill,
so we are seeking clarification. But also, we'd like to
emphasize when there are products that are exempt from registration
because they fall under this category of they're fit for purpose for
exemption because they're not
toxic to animals treated with or exposed to the compound,
because they don't cause unnecessary or unreasonable pain or
distress. This seems reasonable, but when we start
gathering evidence, and this is from the public, these are complaints to our
inspectorate, that products are indeed causing
unnecessary or unreasonable pain and distress.
We challenge the justification for the exemption.
Our example is bird gel repellents.
These are meant to be a tacky substance that a bird gets annoyed
by. They don't like to touch their foot on it. They move their foot away.
They might have a chemical added to irritate the skin.
It's mostly to keep them from coming back to that spot, and then they're not
defecating, causing nuisance in parking garages, on farms.
The problem is for smaller species, they in effect can trap them.
And we have
quite a bit more detail in our submission.
Hmm.
We're deeply concerned. This is a death trap for these birds, and we
have public complaints that make it into the media.
So we wanted to draw light to this product that's currently exempt because it's not
supposed to be doing this stuff. And so we're concerned where in the
current Amendment Bill are the powers to actually go back to this,
reassess these products and say they need to be removed from the schedule.
They need to have greater regulatory oversight.
So that being said,
the third point is around the overseas recognition
of overseas regulators. We supported this for the HASNO bill
a couple of years back. And yes, a lot of people are bringing up the
idea about the actual compound or veterinary medicine.
But for us, we also want to draw attention.
This could reduce the use of animals used in that further testing
collection of data that would be required by our regulators.
So this is an opportunity to reduce animal use in assessing
these compounds because likely they will be assessed on animals.
Is that a good thing or a bad thing?
Good. We want to reduce animal use in research and testing.
Yeah.
And if you have a good trusted system and good quality data, we see
this as an opportunity to actually improve the welfare of animals used in research.
Also, we want to put it out there in terms of, we
noticed in the summary of the submissions for the
early leading up to the bill, there were concerns about needing more
access to vertebrate toxic agents.
So these are the poisons that allow us to do pest control in this
country. It's a really important topic.
One of our key points is we want to minimize as much harm as
possible to those animals being targeted.
We know it's to protect biodiversity or protect animals on a farm, but
we need to cause the least harm possible.
In the past, we know there have been regulatory hurdles for
getting alternative products into New Zealand, getting them approved that are used
in Canada, they're used in the United States, and this is particularly would
be oral contraceptive for certain birds.
Hmm.
So this is a daily oral contraceptive.
As long as they eat it, they cannot create more birds.
This is a wonderful alternative to killing these
birds, and it's not a silver bullet, but it could
be add to an arsenal toolkit that helps us manage pests more
humanely. So we know that there were regulatory barriers.
We do not have these products. We do have it for rats in this country, and it's
very new, but we'd like to see more open-mindedness about that, in
terms of this trusted regulatory approach.
Okay, so in summary, we recommend the select committee to consider three points
to improve public engagement for processes under this bill.
It's really critically important animal welfare stakeholders need to be
around the table,
and that is
without a doubt, given the intent of the bill, it's
required.
Also, that there is a thorough animal welfare assessment
before awarding an exemption,
and also for reviewing consents for products that you need to import for
research.
And then most importantly, clarifying the amendment
that what actually happens when something is exempt, how to get
it off that exempt list if it's shown to cause harm, or is there
a new pathway that actually
it can come off. Whichever
option is, there's a hard way and an easy way that we would like to
suggest,
but definitely needs to happen. And we've certainly made
our position on bird gel very clear to the ACVM team,
the minister, and everybody, and that it's important that actually these harms
do actually get addressed.
So we would require the committee to consider about
making substantive amendments to this bill before it's recommended to go forward
in relation to protecting animal welfare,
and that is detailed in our submission.
We're very happy to take any questions that you may have.
Thank you. We'll go first to Suz and then to Rachel
I think you sort of alluded to it before because you talk about protecting animal
welfare, but in some instances, protecting animal welfare
is actually speeding up the process, not slowing it down.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm specifically referring to Dr.
Dawn Mills' submission in terms of the
antibiotics for the chickens.
Yeah.
So looking after the chickens.
Absolutely.
So you would support-
Absolutely
... initiatives like that for where that there are some times when-
Yes
... just about the ticks-
Yes. So
particularly for poultry, we have a dearth of poultry vets, and we have a
dearth of poultry-available medications that can be used.
So most is used off-label in the poultry industry.
So I would, um, anything that-
Sorry, what does that mean, most is used-
Means off label, so it's not actually approved for use-
Yeah
... in New Zealand. So it's off-label use.
Right.
Yep. So what I would like to see-
What, so they go to the GP and get some amox for their chickens?
No, you can get an exemption to import things into New Zealand.
Oh, yeah, but that was the problem because she was saying that that takes three or
four weeks. By that time, the chickens are-
You're talking about, so in relation to a disease incursion or
something like that?
Mm-hmm.
Because at the moment, there are products that can be used for poultry,
but if we're talking about a big disease incursion, and if you're referring to H5N1
or-
No, a lot of disease incursion is virus.
This is when something goes wrong with the chicken.
Yeah.
And
Dr. Mills did-
Yeah
... mention another product, but when that's not suitable.
She talked about amoxicillin.
No, she talked about another product first and then said that when that doesn't
work, you need amoxicillin-
Yes
... but it takes three weeks to get it.
So yes, absolutely. You go up in-
Yeah
... in the regime. That's absolutely right.
Yeah.
Rachel.
Thank you.
Yep.
Thank you. Just on the comment you made around
bringing in products that have been approved in other jurisdictions.
Yes.
Because that's obviously one of the things that the bill can do.
Mm-hmm.
So do you have any
thoughts or advice on how those particular
countries are chosen just to ensure that we're actually working with like-minded
countries and not necessarily
allowing regulations to change based on a country that might not have
robust practices?
I think you'd want to see that their regulatory regime is protecting
animals used in research, because there could be countries where they
do not have as robust protections.
And so that could be supporting
processes that would not be okay in this country.
Mm-hmm.
So you'd want to
kind of be careful that you're not undermining the protections we would
have in this country.
Yeah. Also, I would suggest that you get all the information from all the different
countries rather than just selecting two countries.
Yeah.
Can I ask a follow-up on that?
No, we've run out of time. We're well over time.
But let's remember that point.
Yeah.
Look, thank you very much for-
You're welcome. Thank you for having us
... presenting to us today.
Nice to see you all again. Thanks.
Right, we'll move on. We've got
Syngenta
here.
Nicola and Dale.
Back here.
Thank you.
Welcome again.
We've got
10 minutes aside,
so
there you go.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to come and present
today. And as a reminder, Nicola Smith and Dale
Neill from Syngenta. The purpose of us attending is really to
stress the importance of having a timely regulatory
process so we can continue to bring innovative,
and new products through to market with better health,
environmental
efficacy, and residue profiles.
In the interest of time, I'm not going to repeat my comments from this morning,
but I did want to add a bill to the question you asked before
to Stephen Salter from FMC about timelines.
Yes. Good.
So,
another point to add to that is quite often in a
big
manufacturing company, you work 12 to 18 months in
advance for forecasting because they are campaign manufacturing it.
Mm-hmm.
So they'll make the next year's products
in one period, usually 12 months in advance.
So if it's not registered, we don't forecast for it.
So the likelihood of being able to access another
10,000 liters, for example, is very low because it's
already been given out to other companies.
Yeah.
So,
sometimes it'll take us 12 to 18 months to get access to
products. So that's why
we need that time for the regulatory approval
to come through so we can build it in.
Mm.
If that hopefully answers your question.
Looks nice. Thank you. Oh, it does. It's good. Yeah.
I'm now going to pass on to Dale to summarize our points.
Great.
Thank you, Nicola. So, as for the HASNO bill that we
spoke to this morning, our key concern with the ACVM Amendment Bill is
around the timeline. So again, it's that how long does it take to get an
approval and how certain can we be around those time frames.
So,
the ACVM Amendment Bill proposes to move these time frames to regulations, and
again, we understand the flexibility that that can provide.
However, it doesn't provide us the necessary certainty that we
need
so urgently from the system as registrants.
So historically, ACVM were not a main
contributor to the delays that we experienced as an applicant going through the
registration system, that predominantly sat with EPA.
But more recently, we have observed some slowdown within our
applications going through the ACVM system.
So of course, that then elevates the uncertainty
for us, and that's very concerning to see.
And as we spoke to this morning, we're constantly making those investment decisions
about which field trials to fund, which products to register, which markets to
prioritize, and right now we've got no visibility on what
these time frames are going to be when they get proposed in these
regulations to come,
and whether those will be commercially- Workable, for us.
So we really, really need these firm and solid time frames as soon as
possible so that we can keep making those investment decisions now to bring
these products through to support the New Zealand primary industries in the future.
So that's why it's so important to get these time frames right, to tighten
up wherever possible, and incorporate-- We would prefer them to
be incorporated into the primary legislation around to provide that certainty.
So we support the time frames that AFANZ has proposed in their
submissions. So they went into some detail about different application types, and
that all aligns with our-
Oh, yes
... our experience and thinking. So we support that.
Our next focus within the ACVM Bill is the international regulator
assessments, which some other submitters have spoken to this morning.
So we really welcome the introduction of the framework into the
ACVM system to be able to better utilize those assessments.
We acknowledge the MOU that they have at the moment with the APVMA,
and look forward to seeing how that can work. But this is a further step.
So,
that is good progress, and it will avoid repeated work
where appropriate,
and, improve that patient processing.
So,
I think it's been mentioned by some others, we share the same concern that in the
current drafting,
the wording does talk about ACVM have regard
to these assessments, and we're just concerned that that's not tight enough.
We want it to be a scenario where they must
use these assessments. So that would be our ask for change there.
So
just to summarize again,
our asks for the committee, requiring those maximum time frames to be
in the primary legislation, not developed in the regulations in
future, and strengthening that overseas regulator
provision, so that it's not optional, it's a
must-do. So getting these two areas right
will be a significant step towards what's intended with this whole
process, what Cabinet's intending,
which is a faster, more certain internationally aligned system,
that's going to give our growers access to the tools that their overseas
competitors already have.
So thank you very much again for giving us another opportunity to speak, and we
invite your questions.
Thank you. We've got a question from Suz and then a question from Steve.
Hi. Thanks again.
Good morning, Dana.
I
probably should know the answer to this, but you mentioned that the slowdown
previously has been more to do with the EPA than the ACVM,
and I just wondered, do those two things happen at the same time?
Yes. So they're assessing together and-
Right. So you don't have to do one and then wait for the other.
No.
So they both-
Generally, with our product services.
But now ACVM's sort of taken over as taking longer, the ACVM's taking
longer.
The ACVM.
We've observed some slowdown in the work that they're doing on our
applications and how quickly some things are passing through, so we're worried that
the trend that we saw with EPA could happen with the ACVM as well.
I know it's about their resourcing and how much they've got in the queue, but it is
concerning the overall time frames
could then be impacted. And previously when we talked
about the five-year time frame, that was really around how long EPA
takes to approve because ACVM can't approve until
EPA have for our products. So,
but yeah, that-
Oh, so one has to go before the other?
Yeah. EPA has to approve first before ACVM can then
approve for our products.
Right. So they kind of run in parallel, but one has to go-
They're assessing at the same time, yes.
Oh, okay.
But they can't give you the final go-
Can't
... until EPA have-
Oh, right
That makes sense. Thank you.
Thank you. Yeah.
Steve.
So we have a preferred list of regulators.
Yes.
Say hypothetically we've got five.
Mm-hmm.
If only two of those regulators approve the current product that's being
considered, we'd accept that as sufficient.
We'd take the most permissive of the regulators out of those five.
I believe your number of five is pretty much spot on with what they're
proposing.
Yeah.
And my understanding of most of those regulators
that would be considered trusted is that they are working to
the highest standards and very similar regulatory approach
across them all. So-
Yeah. So I guess my question is that,
where there was disagreement amongst those regulators, say one had a more rigorous
regime, would we not want to choose the one with the most rigorous regime
before we just accepted any two?
I think if there was a situation where one didn't approve it, then you would have
to take that into account. But in practice, I believe that
most of them would be fairly consistent with their approaches. So.
Yeah. I guess there's one specific example, which I know is an agrochemical example
and I know ACVM, but Paraquat, you guys are the biggest
manufacturer of that in the world, I still believe.
Mm-hmm.
And dozens of countries have banned that chemical.
New Zealand hasn't, Australia hasn't, but-
Australia's about to actually
... Australia's about to. I believe EU has.
So that's an example, I know it's a chemical example, but it's an example where we
could pick out of those five, the two most permissive regimes to
justify us still using it as an example.
When something like that happens in other countries, often the regulators will
review and reassess
the decisions that have been taken in overseas jurisdictions.
And if
that happens, it's up to the local regulator to determine where they want to go.
So.
So you'd want the regulator to be looking at the strongest evidence
primarily, not just that it would have been improved in some ways.
Yeah. They're generally looking at the same evidence.
We submit the same
data packages all around the world. So.
Yeah.
Yep.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Dana, make a question. I think you had to talk.
He had like seven questions. Anyway, that's all right. We'll get there.
Along the same line.
Kat, my question is just, I note your points about timeliness,
and we've talked about this clearly, but
what I'm interested in your view on is if it's taking five years and we've got
all of these things sitting somewhere in the EPA that aren't being
addressed, and then we say, "Right, we've got a timeliness issue and we want to put
a time in a primary legislation,
in the primary legislation." What happens to all of the back-
Blog.
Yes, very good question. There is quite a significant backlog there,
and I don't think I have the answer as to how the regulators are going to
be able to clear that.
Because when you put that in to take it under consideration,
because you don't suddenly just start afresh on-
Well, yeah
... the 1st of July, the next, or whatever.
Okay. Mm-hmm.
So I
think it's worth considering because I don't know how you
balance what's already there and what's coming at you.
Yes, that is going to be a definite challenge for them.
So-
I think that's something we could, a question we could direct towards the
officials as well.
Yes.
Could you not, would the improvements suggested,
though,
fast-track those ones already in the system so-
... they might not
continue to be five years because there has been some improvements put
forward, so that will be reduced.
Yeah.
All right. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
We're over time.
We really appreciate you coming in today.
Thank you.
Right. We're going to move on now to J. Kim Industries Limited.
They're online.
We've got Paul, Dr. Martin Locke, and Sal Kumar.
Thanks, David.
Yes,
please.
Hello, everyone. Can
you hear me?
Yes.
Can you see it?
G'day, Sal. No, we can't see you.
We can see Paul.
Oh, yes, we can now.
That's all right.
And we can see Paul as well.
All right.
So,
thank you for taking the time to
do an oral presentation today. We've put aside 10
minutes.
So, fire away,
and bear in mind to leave some time for questions
at the end.
All right.
Can I share my presentation? Because we have actually a presentation
prepared.
The clerk, can we share that presentation
somehow?
I can share it on the screen.
Please enable screen sharing.
They're just enabling it so that
we can do that.
Thank you.
Perhaps you could make a start while
we're getting the technical issues sorted.
All right.
Oh, it's sorted. It's all sorted.
It's all sorted? Okay.
You should have access.
All right. Let me see if I can load it up quickly.
I'll
just give you an introduction to J.
Kim and who we are.
Yes.
So J. Kim is a New Zealand-based
manufacturer and supplier of agricultural compounds and veterinary
medicines.
So we're a manufacturing license holder, so
we own products,
we register products, we compile dossiers, and we
also manufacture our own products and
customer products.
We're also regulated by
Medsafe. So we manufacture both
human and animal medicines. I'm not sure that human's relevant for the
discussion, but it sort of lets you know where we sit in terms of
the regulatory space. So we're manufacturing
crop protection products, we're manufacturing animal health products,
and we're also manufacturing human medicines.
Thank you, Paul.
Thank you for taking the time today to listen to our intended support for
the ACVM bill. I can hear myself.
While the direction of the bill is a positive one with intent to reduce
barriers to access, improve efficiency and transparency,
the key challenge here is implementation.
Ideal outcomes depend on effective and appropriate implementation in
regulations, guidance,
and assessor practice. Without explicit
expectations on proportionality and reliance,
practice may remain prescriptive and duplicative.
Practical experience shows that without clear guardrails and
implementation expectations, the reforms
risk being blunted by assessor practices,
duplication of work already done by trusted regulators,
and disproportionate compliance burden on low-volume products.
Therefore, we propose that legislative reform must be
accompanied by operational guidance and accountability so
that risk-based regulation is consistently applied.
This includes accompanying the bill with clear guidance
that embeds risk-based assessment expectations, and
publication of service standards and performance reporting that
reflect the end-to-end assessment journey, not only paths of
approval.
I think we're-
Oh, yeah.
There we are.
Yeah, okay.
Yep.
A core objective of the current reforms is to
streamline approvals by leveraging work already completed
by trusted overseas regulators.
However, in practice, this reliance is frequently only
partial.
Applicants are often required to duplicate work,
reproduce data,
or reverify manufacturing evidence that has already been
rigorously assessed and approved by top-tier global
authorities.
Similarly,
the recognition of overseas GMP and
manufacturing evidence remains inconsistent.
This creates unnecessary regulatory duplication,
increased compliance costs, and introduces commercial
uncertainty into the registration process.
Introduce fixed application fees for specific change
categories, such as new trade names and label
changes. Example, manufacturing process changes,
shelf life extensions, new pack sizes,
new active ingredient manufacturers, and these are just examples.
Implement a clear payment process.
ACVM issues an invoice upon submission.
Applicants must pay within seven days.
Assessment timeframe commences once payment is received.
Modernize the product data sheet, which is PDS.
Structure the PDS into defined sections, allow
partial updates to affected sections only.
Eliminate the need to resubmit
unchanged information.
Establish risk-based change pathways.
Minor changes implement immediately
upon notification and payment.
For major changes subject to assessment within defined
statutory timeframes.
Improve regulatory accountability.
If a major change application is not resolved within 70 calendar
days of payment, it is escalated for
ministerial consideration, which is similar to, I believe,
Medsafe.
Ensure conditions do not create unnecessary delays.
Conditions imposed by ACVM should not delay approval.
Business should be provided sufficient time to implement any required
changes.
Provide reasonable transition periods, minimum implementation period of
15 months for new conditions or requirements, unless an
urgent risk necessitates a shorter timeframe.
Support a proportionate, efficient regulatory system.
Low-risk administrative changes should proceed through notification
pathways. Regulatory efforts should be focused on changes that
present genuine risk to product quality, safety, efficacy,
trade, or the environment.
To improve efficiency of the ACVM regulatory process, we propose that
decisions should be based on clearly identified risks,
not preferences for particular technical approaches.
Assessors can become prescriptive on technical approaches without
clearly articulating the underlying risk or the failure
mode being controlled.
This can result in repeated rounds of requests, inconsistent
advice, and data requirements that are not demonstrably
necessary to manage risk.
Such failures have been identified in chemistry manufacturing controls
disputes, where process controls are treated as
insufficient risk mitigation without a clear statement of the
unmitigated risk.
Furthermore, when additional conditions are imposed late in the process
without being raised during request for information stages,
they consequently reduce procedural fairness and increase cost.
By grounding every data request and decision in clearly identified
risk rather than technical preferences, we create a
proportionate and transparent model that will be backed by a written
justification for rejected controls,
thus preventing unnecessary rework, and subsequently fosters a
more consistent and efficient regulatory environment.
The bill's move towards approved specifications, while positive,
presents the caveat that such specifications or associated
conditions may become overly prescriptive
and effectively lock manufacturing into single processes,
even where different approaches can produce equivalent
outcomes.
This can be seen-
Sal, I might just interrupt you there, because we're going to run out of time, and
there's a couple of questions there.
Okay.
I'll go through it very quickly then. One minute?
You've got one minute left.
Oh, okay.
Can we get the slides?
Yes. Would you be able to send those slides through to the
clerk of the committee so that we have access to them?
Yes, we can.
Yes.
Thank you. Look, the question I'd like to ask is, you
talk about situations where additional conditions are opposed late in the
process without being raised during the request for
information stages, reducing procedural fairness and
increasing cost. Have you got examples of that?
Yes, we do.
Would you be able to supply them as well?
Yes, we can.
Thank you.
Does anyone else have a question?
No.
Suze? No. All right. We've actually come to time here
anyway.
So thank you very much for your time today.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. And your cool graphics.
If you could-- Yeah, and your good
cool graphics, as Suze said. If you could, please send that
through to the clerk of the committee, we'd really appreciate
We
will do that.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay, thanks.
Right, moving on, we've got NZ Pork and Pig Industry
Veterinarians via Zoom.
There we are.
We've got
Bruce Welch
and Frances Clement, I think.
They're going to be online,
at some stage.
Here we is.
I am here, and-
Ah, yes, you're both there.
Yes.
Look, thank you very much for appearing before the committee today.
You have 10 minutes. I would advise you to make sure you
leave time for questions.
Fire away.
Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today
on behalf of commercial pig farmers.
I am Frances Clement, policy advisor with New Zealand Pork.
I'm joined by Dr. Bruce Welch, a pig
industry vet. Pig farming in New Zealand is a
niche livestock farming sector with a farm gate value
of around 240 million. Bruce
and I want to highlight the challenges faced by
commercial pig farmers. Pig farmers and their vets are
aware of state-of-the-art formulations
available internationally to support pig health,
pig welfare, and productivity. Our farmers
compete in the marketplace with imported pork produced
with these aids.
60% of Kiwis' pork consumption is imported,
so Kiwis are eating pork produced with
these aids.
We were very encouraged by the suite of sound
recommendations from the Ministry for Regulation's
review. We support the objective sought by the
ACVM Amendment Bill. The bill is a step in the
right direction, but as currently drafted, we don't
see it delivering meaningful benefits to pig farmers.
For example, a new section, Section
8AA, appears to be more enabling of
exemption from registration for products
classified as generally regarded as safe,
but the data required to grant such an extension is extensive,
so this pathway will still be very costly.
A new section, Section 20A, appears to
enable recognition of overseas assessments
conducted in comparable jurisdictions.
This was a recommendation of the Ministry for Regulation review.
It appears a no-brainer. But the drafting is
only may consider, not must consider.
And then the decision on the application to register,
which is Section 21, must consider
the risks and benefits of all known practical
alternatives available.
Why is such a comparative analysis
always required? Shouldn't the decision be
standalone?
Don't we want to provide a fuller toolbox of
aids?
Excessive analytical requirements means greater
costs and time for suppliers.
The resources of our regulators are stretched
evaluating this data. Wait lists grow,
costs mount up, and it is our farmers who
ultimately pay.
In your deliberations, please recognize the needs of
niche sectors, particularly when products are
widely used in comparable
overseas jurisdictions. Now I'll hand you over
to Bruce.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to present.
I'm a pig vet who consults to just over half of the commercial pig
farms in New Zealand. Our industry is small but
significant to New Zealand, both economically and
reputationally.
Mm-hmm.
We have one of the highest health statuses in the world, and we continue to drive
out diseases and elevate health on our farms.
This can work against us in the size of the market for animal
remedies. We also have one of the highest animal welfare standards
in the world. Unfortunately, present access to appropriate
animal remedies poses a significant impediment to animal welfare and
productivity in our industry.
Comparing our current situation to 15 years ago, we now have less
than half of the registered products that we had available then.
This includes vaccines, antibiotics, parasiticides,
metabolics, reproduction, and endocrine products.
Consequently, a high proportion of what we currently use on farm is a
variation to the label conditions or is a product
registered for another species or purpose.
This is legal in New Zealand, but requires that the prescribing vet take full
accountability for any consequences.
We also have access to a special permit to import on the grounds of animal
welfare. While we are grateful to have this option and we use it
regularly, the permit application process takes one
to four weeks, the application cost ranges from $300 to
$6,000, and we then have to source and import the product.
The supplier company often insists that we buy from a third
party in the exporting country, which is often challenging.
With all of those obstacles, the animal welfare problem can be well out of
control by the time we get the product to the farm.
In addition, the product, once imported, can only be used for the farm
listed on the permit. If another need arises, we cannot use it on that
farm, no matter how safe it is.
We have frequent discussions with pharmaceutical companies
asking for access to new and existing products used in most other
countries, and their response to our request is almost
universally no.
The cost to register is too high, the waiting time is too long,
the requirements are too rigorous, and the market is too small to
justify the costs.
As an example, all piglets need an iron injection after birth to thrive.
We have access to one registered iron product in New Zealand at present.
Some years ago, a second iron product failed to achieve
registration due to a number of issues, including that the
dossier was more than 10 years old.
This product is made in the same factory and is chemically identical to
iron injection used in humans in New Zealand.
We can use it in people, but not in pigs.
Another company tried to register an antibiotic with the same active
ingredient as a currently registered but unavailable product.
After two years and $75,000, they were turned down on a
technicality. The product is widely used in Australia and
globally, and we have no direct alternative.
The company is not willing to entertain further registration
. We have many other examples that time won't permit.
What is the s-
In our opinion, product safety and impact on
international trade
continue to be prioritized for focus on
efficacy is what creates the largest dollar cost and is a main roadblock in getting
products registered here. Efficacy and pharmacodynamics trials to
meet New Zealand expectations can cost the value of a house in Auckland.
Efficacy trials don't always translate to field efficacy, and it
is the latter that counts. We would far rather have access to a
number of products with varying efficacy than to no products at
all because the regulatory barrier is too high.
The market rejects products with poor efficacy.
Even a softening of this stance would be helpful for our cause.
The current bill does not fully address our concerns, and we beg
Parliament to help ensure that smaller industries like us have
access to the products we need and that are available internationally.
The current and proposed framework will only increasingly punish
us for continuing to elevate our disease-freedom status
on farms.
That is unjust and contrary to animal welfare aspirations.
We are in a major pickle. Please, can you help us? Thank you.
Thank you very much. Now we'll move to questions.
So,
I'll ask you the same question as I asked the previous submitter
around
time frames and requests for information
that come through from
the, when you're looking to get a product,
prescribed in New Zealand, I guess you'd say.
So, the last
submitter said they'd seek, they didn't give us exact examples because
they ran out of time. They're going to send us some.
Do you have examples where you have been looking to get
product in here, and then at the last minute you've had a request for
information that wasn't signaled prior and
other requests for information?
I've never attempted to register a product. I'm an end user.
But I can tell you that other parties that have attempted to
register have found
significant time delays in getting back to them and
a number of layers. Just to get in at the starting gate for a
registration is challenging and takes quite a lot of
time. And then once you're in, you have a lot of layers of
questions and time delays there.
And in sympathy to our ACVM colleagues, they have procedures
they have to follow. I think they do the best they can with what they're given.
Yeah, and I understand it also runs in parallel with
HASNO,
EPA as well, so it can get quite
complicated, I guess.
Do we have any other questions, committee?
Yes.
No.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much for your presentation today,
and we'll consider-
Thank you
... when we come to deliberations. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Next.
So, we will go to private.